---
id: 5463d0bc-759f-11ef-948a-7fed0a8ff07e
---

# Caudal epidural blocks in paediatric patients: a review and practical considerations

## Links
[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/caudal-192046f6efb)
[Read Original](https://omnivore.app/attachments/u/11295876-8ebd-43c7-b9d3-f693d99c5cb5/attachment.pdf)

## Highlights

> the puncture site, sacral osteomyelitis, or local nerve injury. Yet, the morbidity associated with any of these events is low. Ecoffey and colleagues 4 analysed data of 31 132 regional anaesthetic procedures and identified only eight patients with complications related to caudal blocks: six dural taps (without postdural puncture headache), one nerve injury, and one case of cardiac toxicity. Polaner and colleagues 5 even reported ‘no complications in the caudal group ’ , pointing out that the main periprocedural problems were inability to place the block and block failure. 5 While central regional techniques in adults are preferably conducted with the patient awake to get instant feedback on paraesthesias, pain, or symptoms of local anaesthetic systemic toxicity, children are generally sedated, so as to ensure immobility during the puncture. 41 e 44 The available literature confirms that regional anaesthesia is safe during deep sedation or general anaesthesia [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/caudal-192046f6efb#8e5d623c-157a-47a4-a8d5-105fa7b61ad3)  ^8e5d623c

> Ketamine binds to spinal opioid and N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors and has no respiratory side-effects. 49 In a preservative-free form, both racemic ketamine and esket- amine can be safely administered at 0.5 e 1 mg kg 1 into the epidural space. 57,58 However, as animal models have revealed neuronal apoptosis upon intrathecal application, 59 current European guidelines recommend a conservative dose con- centrations of 0.5 mg kg 1 to minimise side-effects [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/caudal-192046f6efb#75544107-c6ef-41bd-9318-006fd8acd936)  ^75544107

> Toxic events and their management Systemic toxic events from local anaesthetics may involve cardio- or neurotoxicity. Current guidelines recommend that any haemodynamic deterioration be treated by Intralipid ® 20% as first-line therapy along with epinephrine/adrenaline for cardiopulmonary resuscitation until circulation is restored or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation has been installed. 27,41 The Intralipid ® should be administered in these situations i.v. as a rapid bolus injection of 1 e 1.5 ml kg 1 fol- lowed by continuous infusion (0.25 mg 1 kg 1 min 1 ) and repeated boli every 3 e 5 min up to 2 e 5 ( 10) ml kg 1 . Some regimens make the administration of a maintenance fluid (0.25 ml kg 1 min 1 ) seem useful. 41 Neurotoxic seizures need to be treated with propofol, benzodiazepines, or barbitu- rates. 41 Recent discussions about cardiac output affecting the vascular absorption of drugs from tissue have suggested that it may be useful to make allowances for the higher HR in under 2-yr-olds by reducing the doses of local anaesthetics, thus decreasing the risk of systemic toxicity further [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/caudal-192046f6efb#0f7e11d8-3ea5-4db9-8231-ed151210d675)  ^0f7e11d8

> Age and body positioning [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/caudal-192046f6efb#5170a612-1fba-4b02-b873-013ff05b3ba9)  ^5170a612

> the pubertal growth spurt has been found to involve cranial movement of the spinal cord termination from the L3 to a L1 L2 level within only 12 months. 14 In contrast, Shin and colleagues 15 observed in a study population of chil- dren that the dural sac ended lower than S2 e S3 in 8% of pa- tients. This lower position of the spinal cord and dura increases the risk of inadvertent dural puncture in newborns and tod- dlers. As to body positioning, Koo and colleagues 16 demon- strated that lateral placement of patients with their neck, hips, and knees maximally flexed was associated with significant cephalad shifting of the dural sac. In other words, finding the right position for a patient can help to avoid complications. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/caudal-192046f6efb#0656c809-1925-45ed-bbd6-79bec6118189)  ^0656c809

> The superiority of ultrasound-guided puncture is so obvious as to remain unchallenged, especially in preterm babies and in infants whose sacral anatomy is not well understood [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/caudal-192046f6efb#9191867e-42d3-4c06-8167-76bd08758359)  ^9191867e

> Needle types Selecting the right equipment is essential to caudal anaes- thesia. A large-scale study showed that wrong tools led to preventable neurological complications. 32 It is not appropriate to use the same materials in children as in adults. Cannulae for single-injection caudal blocks are today available in different types and sizes, including a range of narrow-gauge (22- up to 25-gauge) short-bevel Tuohy and Crawford needles with or without a connected injection line. 1,33 Tissue trauma decreases with the calibre of the needle. 12 While stylet needles have become an established part of standard operating pro- cedures in spinal and thoracic epidural anaesthesia, paediatric caudal blocks are most commonly performed with needles that do not feature a stylet. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/caudal-192046f6efb#e2f503e1-1960-4209-b954-93606a1ff0a8)  ^e2f503e1

> Palpation for needle insertion [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/caudal-192046f6efb#6f5761e1-36ec-4c98-9244-65610538f523)  ^6f5761e1

> The ‘whoosh ’ and ‘swoosh ’ tests [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/caudal-192046f6efb#0eac4ecc-1f65-4ab6-a99c-a1d13ddb4cbc)  ^0eac4ecc

> With the patient in the left lateral decubitus position and the hips and knees flexed, the sacral hiatus can be identified using either the conventional landmark technique or ultrasound [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/caudal-192046f6efb#30834f0a-21c0-4f45-a6bc-7fc83886fe7a)  ^30834f0a

> First of all, the posterior superior iliac spines are palpated via anatomical landmarks, the line between both spines (Tuffier’s line) representing the base of an equilateral triangle the tip of which indicates the position of the sacral hi- atus [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/caudal-192046f6efb#65573496-98b4-4ea1-a344-bb6998a9ecbf)  ^65573496

> Landmark-based palpation of the sacral hiatus cannot guarantee that a needle is correctly inserted to its target position. Known risks in this regard include, as has been noted above, accidental puncture of the dura or intravascular access. The ‘whoosh ’ test was first described by Lewis and colleagues 22 d in a 1992 report involving adult patients d as a specific and sensitive method to confirm needle placement in caudal anaesthesia. Injecting 2 ml of air into the epidural space resulted in a ‘whoosh ’ sound, which was verified through a stethoscope held over the thor- acolumbar spine. After reports of neurological and haemody- namic side-effects from this air injection, 23,24 the method was refined by injecting not air, but local anaesthetics, accordingly dubbed the ‘swoosh ’ test [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/caudal-192046f6efb#313bbf7e-74fb-4914-822b-9a6fefe48a7b)  ^313bbf7e

> The sacrococcygeal ligament can be palpated between the two sacral cornua, which is where the needle should penetrate the skin at an approximate 45  angle. Once the liga- ment has been passed, a flatter angle is adjusted by descending the needle before it can be advanced to the correct final posi- tion. 18 It should be noted that Tuffier’s line does not seem to be an adequate reference point in neonates placed in a lateral flexed position, as it will shift to a significantly more caudal position in this scenario. 19 Before the local anaesthetic can be applied, cautious aspiration or passive drainage is required to rule out an inadvertent intravascular or spinal needle location [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/caudal-192046f6efb#bbd17215-091b-4270-956e-1e64de20ab67)  ^bbd17215

> Higher risk of toxicity in children Two factors contribute to the higher risk of toxicity from local anaesthetics in children: alterations in plasma concentrations of alpha-1 acid glycoprotein (AGP) and immaturity of the cy- tochrome P450 (CYP) system. Both factors are age-dependent. Local anaesthetics get bound to AGP on administration, so that a low AGP concentration results in a higher free (non-protein- bound) circulating fraction of local anaesthetics. Recent liter- ature shows that AGP concentrations are comparably low at birth and increase during the 1st year of life. 45,47 The CYP system matures during adolescence. Bupivacaine is metab- olised by the CYP3A4 subtype and reaches maximum clear- ance at 12 months of age, but ropivacaine is metabolised by CYP1A2 and may not reach maximum clearance before 6 e 8 yr. 12,45 Fortunately, a greater volume of distribution compared with adults mitigates the risk of toxicity in children. 12,41 While this greater volume will reduce peak concentrations in plasma after a single bolus injection, it cannot d because of the aforementioned immaturity of the metabolism d prevent accumulation of the drug when applied continuously [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/caudal-192046f6efb#bd022a83-4513-4e1d-a948-7650638e98e5)  ^bd022a83

> Technical considerations Ultrasound vs landmarks While the landmark-based approach to caudal anaesthesia does yield convincing success rates, it is also, as a well-known complication, prone to block failure with the result of inade- quate anaesthesia [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/caudal-192046f6efb#93f97983-9253-4474-a97d-5d408a0d9947)  ^93f97983

> Ultrasound vs swoosh/whoosh testing Both the ‘whoosh ’ and the ‘swoosh ’ test proved to be similarly reliable when properly used, with current recommendations supporting the use of either air or saline for the loss-of [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/caudal-192046f6efb#b55e9303-a45f-4184-b0a9-9e3981dfb160)  ^b55e9303

> resistance technique. 26 e 28 What has remained a major limi- tation of both tests is the subjectivity of examiners in judging the correct noise. Having observed in 2006 that even the introduction of Doppler ultrasound failed to compensate for this limitation, 26 Raghunathan and colleagues 29 presented data 2 yr later affirming their 2006 hypothesis that ultrasound was the superior method. They found that the best single in- dicator of successful epidural injection was to visualise by ultrasound in real time the turbulence generated by the local anaesthetic within the caudal space. More evidence support- ing the benefit of ultrasound guidance in neuraxial blocks has been gathered since. A recent Cochrane Review has found that the use of ultrasound improves the success rate of blocks and increases their duration, especially in young children [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/caudal-192046f6efb#855bc377-94e5-4307-b51f-d700fdbab8fc)  ^855bc377


## Content
