---
id: 5f89b58c-72c6-11ef-960e-6f1378195133
---

# Anaesthesia for pituitary surgery
#Omnivore

[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/attachment-pdf-191f1c62504)
[Read Original](https://omnivore.app/attachments/u/2b9dec0e-4402-41d2-9767-3a13c19bdeca/attachment.pdf)

## Highlights

> severe hypertension. I.V. tranexamic acid at induction has been shown to minimise bleeding and improve surgical field quality. 24 Monitoring In addition to standardised monitoring, depth of anaesthesia monitoring is recommended if using total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA). Urinary catheters are indicated for com- plex cases where DI is anticipated. Invasive arterial pressure monitoring is recommended, given the frequent haemody- namic changes and proximity to carotid arteries and cavernous sinus and can assist with monitoring of haemo- globin, electrolytes and blood glucose concentrations. High- risk patients warrant invasive arterial pressure monitoring before induction of anaesthesia. Central venous catheter- isation is rarely required unless cardiovascular compromise is present, but wide-bore i.v. access is recommended. Patients are placed supine with a 20 e 30 head-up tilt to improve venous drainage. The head is placed on a horseshoe headrest or Rubens pillow or secured with a Mayfield skull clamp. Conduct of anaesthesia The conduct, rather than the technique, of anaesthesia will have the greatest impact on surgical conditions. TIVA using short-acting agents is preferred, as it facilitates controlled and smooth emergence and can be titrated throughout to main- tain haemodynamic stability. Lu and colleagues’ meta- analysis demonstrated that TIVA was associated with reduced blood loss and improved surgical visualisation compared with an inhalation anaesthetic technique. 25 How- ever, neither method has shown to be superior in affecting quality of postoperative recovery. 26 For resection of large and invasive adenomas, a lumbar drain can be inserted at the beginning of surgery to minimise cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak, by reducing the pressure at the site of surgery and allow the injection of sterile 0.9% saline to promote the visibility of suprasellar tumours through trans- mission of pressure in the CSF column. However, there is limited evidence to support this practice and it is infrequently used in the UK. 27 The surgical team may request the anaes- thetist to perform a Valsalva manoeuvre to improve visual- isation of tumours with suprasellar extensions, check for CSF leaks or ensure adequate haemostasis. The surgical team should also inform the anaesthetic team if CSF leak is present, as this limits the ability to maintain a 30 head-up tilt after surgery. Transsphenoidal surgery is not typically painful and can be managed with simple analgesics, combined with short-acting opioids for breakthrough pain. Non-steroidal anti-inflamma- tory drugs are generally avoided because of concerns over bleeding. Preventing postoperative nausea and vomiting is crucial, as vomiting and retching can increase venous and intracranial pressures, increasing the risk of bleeding and can also unmask previously unidentified CSF leak. 21 Antibiotics There is no clear evidence base for using prophylactic antibi- otics, and practices vary widely between surgeons and in- stitutions. 28 Common regimens incorporate cephalosporins or penicillins with or without metronidazole. A recent meta- analysis found no benefit in using multiple antibiotics over a single antibiotic. 29 Current best evidence shows that prophy- lactic antibiotics do not significantly alter the rates of post- operative meningitis or sinus infections. 30 Steroids Perioperative steroid replacement practices vary and there is no unifying guidance. 31 Anaesthetists should be familiar with local protocols and it is essential that endocrinologists are involved. Our institution uses hydrocortisone (100 mg at in- duction of anaesthesia, followed by 15 mg in the morning and 5 mg in the afternoon of the first postoperative day). Serum cortisol is checked on the second postoperative day and continued maintenance regimes are guided by the serum concentration. Potential complications Major complications during transsphenoidal surgery are rare, with venous bleeding or CSF leaks the most frequently encountered. Venous bleeding is generally well controlled by pressure application, haemostatic agents or additional reverse Trendelenburg. CSF leaks occur in 2 e 12% of trans- sphenoidal resections, more commonly with revision surgery and large adenomas. 32 Prompt intraoperative repair of CSF leaks is essential given the potential for serious complica- tions, such as meningitis and pneumocephalus. Repair tech- niques use autologous fat or fascia grafting from the thigh or abdomen to fill the sella turcica, or use synthetic materials such as Surgicel. If there is an anticipation autologous tissue may be required, the thigh and abdomen should be prepared at the beginning of surgery. Injury to the ICA, although rare, is one of the most serious and potentially fatal complications of transsphenoidal sur- gery. 33 Managing ICA injury requires rapid resuscitation with fluids and other measures to achieve prompt haemostasis. Urgent detailed digital subtraction angiographic examination and a multidisciplinary treatment approach is needed. Given the life-threatening nature of the injury, every endoscopic skull base team should have an established protocol for managing vascular injuries, with access to interventional neuroradiology. 34 Venous air embolism is a rare complication of trans- sphenoidal pituitary resection. Clinical suspicion, routine monitoring and anaesthetic vigilance is sufficient. 35 Tracheal extubation At the end of surgery, any throat packs are removed, the airway is cleared of blood and secretions under direct laryn- goscopy and the trachea is extubated ideally with the patient sitting and awake, particularly if they have a difficult airway. Patients at the greatest risk of airway-related complications are those with acromegaly, class III or above obesity or sleep apnoea; these patients may benefit from extubation over a ventilation catheter or solid intubating stylette. 36 The anaes- thetist should be prepared to manage potential airway diffi- culties, such as airway obstruction, laryngospasm and inadequate ventilation, and measures to control blood pres- sure during emergence. The aims for smooth emergence for anaesthesia are to prevent coughing, minimise bleeding, prevent dislodgement of the fat graft, CSF leak and airway catastrophes. Controlled and smooth emergence allows early neurological assessment [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/attachment-pdf-191f1c62504#84cf3bb5-7e4e-4b19-867f-26c4c7ef6b58)  ^84cf3bb5

> with coexisting cardiovascular or respiratory dis- ease or severe OSA should be identified and optimised. Con- current endocrine disease, such as adrenocortical or thyroid deficiencies, should be investigated and suitably managed. Some patients may be receiving high-dose steroid therapy before surgery; dosing should be clarified to ensure appro- priate perioperative steroid replacement [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/attachment-pdf-191f1c62504#da6cb8fe-620a-44b2-8f77-a5249dad9694)  ^da6cb8fe

> minimises problems with airway management and reduces postoperative bleeding. Smooth emergence may be achieved with a low-dose remifentanil infusion until the patient is extubated, or tracheal tube exchange for a supraglottic airway device whilst the patient remains deeply anaesthetised. The latter technique can increase risk of complications with less experienced anaesthetists. Early reintubation or insertion of a supraglottic device should be considered if airway compro- mise occurs post extubation, as excessive positive pressure with facemask ventilation may precipitate CSF leaks, pneu- mocephalus and bleeding. There are no clear guidelines or consensus regarding the use of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) after sur- gery in patients with OSA. Current practice avoids CPAP where possible to minimise risks of CSF leak, tension pneumo- cephalus and meningitis. 37 Postoperative hypoxaemia in these patients can be managed with high-flow humidified oxygen through a face mask with close monitoring in a level 2 critical care unit. 38 Postoperative management Most transsphenoidal pituitary surgeries are uncomplicated, with a duration of 60 e 150 min, particularly for non-secretory microadenomas. At our institutions, patients are managed in a specialist neurosurgical ward after the initial, closely monitored, postoperative recovery period. Patients with known difficult airways, metabolic disturbances or OSA should be monitored in a level 2 unit for at least 24 h after surgery. Regular observations for visual and neurological changes are required in the immediate postoperative period to detect any deterioration indicating a life-threatening emergency. Prompt urgent imaging and neurosurgical inter- vention are indicated in such scenarios. The most frequent postoperative complications are CSF rhinorrhoea and DI. To reduce the risk of postoperative CSF leak, patients are given stool softeners and asked to avoid straining and nose-blowing for up to 6 weeks after surgery 39 . Central transient DI usually develops in the first 24 h. Early identification is necessary, by monitoring for signs and symptoms, fluid balance, urine and serum osmolarities and electrolytes. If DI persists, appropriate fluid therapy to replace losses is needed and treatment with desmopressin may be required. The discussion regarding postoperative sodium imbalances is beyond the scope of this article but is explored in a recent article in this journal. 40 Management of specific endocrine disorders requires collaboration with an endocrinologist, with close monitoring of serum electrolytes and hormonal levels. Other potential complications include epistaxis, sinusitis, meningitis, hypo- pituitarism, cranial nerve palsies, visual impairment, cerebral ischemia, stroke and hydrocephalus. Early detection and appropriate management of complications is key to improve patient outcomes. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/attachment-pdf-191f1c62504#0a212fd8-4461-4b20-98d5-6d9798a6fd61)  ^0a212fd8

> Table 1 Hormones produced and stored in the anterior and posterior pituitary gland and their systemic effects. Hypothalamic hormone Pituitary hormone Target organ Effect Anterior pituitary Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) Growth hormone (GH) Liver, kidneys, bone, muscle, adipose tissue, etc. Growth Glucose management General metabolism Thyroid-releasing hormone (TRH) Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) Thyroid gland General metabolism Thyroxine production Gonadotrophic-releasing hormone (GnRH) Luteinising hormone (LH) Reproductive organs Stimulates production of sex hormones Gonadotrophic-releasing hormone (GnRH) Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) Reproductive organs Stimulates production of sperm and eggs Corticotropic-releasing hormone (CRH) Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) Adrenal glands Physiological adaptation to stress Cortisol production Dopamine Prolactin Breasts (Negative feedback loop) Stimulates milk production Posterior pituitary Oxytocin Stored in pituitary only Reproductive organs Stimulates uterine contraction Lactation Antidiuretic hormone Stored in pituitary only Kidneys Regulates water balance [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/attachment-pdf-191f1c62504#aa381aa5-66b6-4b0c-b77a-ba3f4c75f263)  ^aa381aa5

> The transsphenoidal approach is currently the standard for surgical management of PAs ( Fig. 2 ). This approach is minimally invasive, with fewer anticipated postoperative complications than transcranial approaches. Transcranial approaches are reserved for particularly large or invasive tumours, or inadequate resection via transsphenoidal routes. Transsphenoidal resections require access to the anterior base of the skull through the nose and sphenoidal sinus via endoscopic, or infrequently microscopic, tech- niques. The transnasal approach requires clearance of the intranasal passage to facilitate the simultaneous use of the endoscope and surgical instruments and therefore ENT and neurosurgical collaboration is common. Intraoperative computer-assisted navigation and guidance aids the sur- geon, particularly for revision surgeries or anatomical mapping. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/attachment-pdf-191f1c62504#908de364-cd8f-4e55-85ea-a5c679e802f1)  ^908de364

> Intraoperative management Principles of neuroanaesthesia should be observed throughout, including induction of anaesthesia with minimal cardiovascular disturbance, optimal cerebral perfusion and oxygenation, meticulous haemodynamic control, readiness to manage intraoperative complications and smooth emergence from anaesthesia [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/attachment-pdf-191f1c62504#4ab33edf-055e-4f54-95ea-c2ccd1f58757)  ^4ab33edf

> Acromegaly Excessive GH production after epiphyseal closure causes acromegaly, and tumours occurring before puberty present as gigantism. Symptom onset is insidious and affects mul- tiple body systems. Soft tissue and bony expansion complicate airway managemen t, caused by kyphoscoliosis, prognathism, macrognathia, macroglossia, pharyngeal and laryngeal tissue hypertrophy or rarely recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy. Approximately 25% of patients with acro- megaly develop associated thy roid goitres, causing tracheal compression. 9 Patients with acromegaly may develop refractory hyper- tension, left ventricular hypertrophy, ischaemic heart disease, cardiomyopathy, biventricular dysfunction, arrhythmias, impaired glucose tolerance or overt diabetes mellitus. Fig 1 Coronal view of pituitary gland and relation to surrounding structures. (Source: Holt EH, Lupsa B, Lee GS et al. Chapter 11 - Hormonal control of growth. In: Goodman’s Basic Medical Endocrinology , 5 th Edn. Oxford: Elsevier, 2022; 335 e 79; Fig. 11.11). 3 [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/attachment-pdf-191f1c62504#330939bc-315e-4fa3-9378-91b90671513c)  ^330939bc

> Acromegaly Excessive GH production after epiphyseal closure causes acromegaly, and tumours occurring before puberty present as gigantism. Symptom onset is insidious and affects mul- tiple body systems. Soft tissue and bony expansion complicate airway managemen t, caused by kyphoscoliosis, prognathism, macrognathia, macroglossia, pharyngeal and laryngeal tissue hypertrophy or rarely recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy. Approximately 25% of patients with acro- megaly develop associated thy roid goitres, causing tracheal compression. 9 Patients with acromegaly may develop refractory hyper- tension, left ventricular hypertrophy, ischaemic heart disease, cardiomyopathy, biventricular dysfunction, arrhythmias, impaired glucose tolerance or overt diabetes mellitus. Fig 1 Coronal view of pituitary gland and relation to surrounding structures. (Source: Holt EH, Lupsa B, Lee GS et al. Chapter 11 - Hormonal control of growth. In: Goodman’s Basic Medical Endocrinology , 5 th Edn. Oxford: Elsevier, 2022; 335 e 79; Fig. 11.11). [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/attachment-pdf-191f1c62504#1e57924d-ab57-4905-a4fd-6386161a8d34)  ^1e57924d

> Preoperative care A perioperative multidisciplinary approach to management is essential, involving specialists in endocrinology, ophthal- mology, ear nose and throat (ENT), neurosurgery, radiology and anaesthesia [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/attachment-pdf-191f1c62504#cfcf6bf1-f3ad-4e11-8cec-b936c4044e35)  ^cfcf6bf1

> Airway management Patients undergoing pituitary surgery do not appear to have a higher rate of difficult intubation than general patients, with a reported incidence between 1% and 4%, but presence of acromegaly increases the risk of a difficult airway four-to five- fold. 22 Therefore, all equipment necessary for difficult intu- bation should be readily available. Facemask ventilation may prove difficult because of soft tissue and bony overgrowth; in these patients, a supraglottic airway can be used to assist ventilation. Videolaryngoscopy is increasingly used as a first-line technique for tracheal intu- bation in patients with acromegaly. Patients identified as high risk for a difficult airway, particularly when there is laryngeal involvement, should undergo planned awake tracheal intu- bation with video-assisted bronchoscopy. This is preferable to emergency use during failed intubation under general anaesthesia, minimising airway- and cardiovascular-related catastrophes. Oral intubation with a reinforced tracheal tube placed away from the operative site is preferred. The mouth and pharynx can be packed to prevent bleeding into the glottis and entry of blood into the stomach, which may precipitate post- operative nausea and vomiting. If throat packs are used, safety checks are necessary to prevent their retention. The role of supraglottic airways in pituitary surgery is controversial. Although they offer reduced cardiovascular and respiratory responses to laryngeal stimulation and smooth emergence from anaesthesia, there is an increased risk of airway contamination and aspiration. 14 , 21 , 23 The choice of airway device should be modified to the individual patient’s comorbidities and anaesthetist’s experience. Nasal preparation minimises bleeding and offers anal- gesia, using topical vasoconstrictive agents with lidocaine. The most used preparation is a 0.5% phenylephrine and 5% lidocaine mixture. Other combinations of local anaesthetics and vasoconstrictors can be used, but caution should be exercised with these preparations in patients with cardio- vascular disease owing to arrhythmogenic effects and risk of [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/attachment-pdf-191f1c62504#0212c12b-0f76-4e8d-9df1-c4f878be49d9)  ^0212c12b

> Clinical features Pituitary tumours present with local mass effect symptoms, hormone hyposecretion or hypersecretion syndromes, or are asymptomatic and discovered incidentally during in- vestigations for other conditions. Pituitary adenomas causing GH and ACTH hypersecretion pose significant challenges, resulting in acromegaly and Cushing’s disease, respectively, and both conditions require complete tumour resection for biochemical cure. Any pituitary tumour expanding into the intrasellar space can cause mass effect symptoms. Commonly encountered symptoms are headache and visual changes, classically bitemporal hemianopia and reduced visual acuity. Pituitary gland compression can result in hormonal hyposecretion syndromes, such as panhypopituitarism, diabetes insipidus (DI) or other endocrine insufficiency syndromes. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/attachment-pdf-191f1c62504#76b68d08-313b-48cb-834e-5e9ed2b0d251)  ^76b68d08

> All patients require a focused history and physical exami- nation, emphasising cardiovascular, respiratory, metabolic and airway pathologies and visual field and acuity assess- ment. Baseline serum investigations include full blood count, electrolytes, renal function, blood glucose, blood type and screen and hormone profiling, including cortisol, oestradiol, testosterone, luteinising hormone, follicle-stimulating hor- mone, thyroid function tests, prolactin, GH and insulin-like growth factor-1. Further serum hormonal testing is tailored according to clinical suspicion of functional tumours. Serum electrolyte and glucose abnormalities are expected and should be addressed before surgery. Electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, chest X-ray and relevant lung function tests may be indicated. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) maps the size, location and extensions of the lesion, identifying hydrocephalus or oedema and aiding surgical planning. 15 Computerised tomography (CT) of the paranasal sinuses or cranial CT angiograms can help preoperative surgical plan- ning and be combined with MRI for intraoperative navigation [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/attachment-pdf-191f1c62504#7e50261c-91fa-4589-9351-a9bb9b68822f)  ^7e50261c

> Pituitary tumours are the third most common intracranial tumour and transsphenoidal surgery is the commonest approach for management, with lower overall complication rates comparable with conventional transcranial surger [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/attachment-pdf-191f1c62504#671968cd-abb6-4f8a-be95-b97f81f31478)  ^671968cd

> Patients with acromegaly are anticipated to have difficult airways. Bedside screening tools, such as the modified Mal- lampati score and thyromental distance, are frequently used as a predictor, but in isolation, individual screening tests have limited positive predictive value. However, they can be useful as part of a multivariate score. 16 Therefore, preoperative evaluation with flexible nasal endoscopy is a useful tool, particularly for patients presenting with evidence of laryngeal involvement, such as hoarseness, dyspnoea or snoring. 17 This technique offers direct visualisation of upper airway abnor- malities under dynamic conditions and allows definitive airway planning. In all cases, discussions concerning the likelihood of awake tracheal intubation should be initiated before surgery [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/attachment-pdf-191f1c62504#8e692049-d56d-48a9-89ad-1c3cd2722082)  ^8e692049

> Pituitary tumours account for 10 e 15% of all adult brain tu- mours, with a prevalence of 16.7%. 1 , 5 , 6 Most pituitary ade- nomas (PAs) are benign, slow-growing tumours with a poorly understood aetiology. Pituitary carcinomas are extremely rare, accounting for less than 0.2% of all pituitary tumours. 7 Pituitary adenomas are categorised as macroadenomas ( > 10 mm) or microadenomas (  10 mm), and as functioning/ hormone-secreting (46 e 64%) or non-functioning (36 e 54%). 8 Functioning PAs are subclassified as prolactin, growth hor- mone (GH), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) or rarely thyrotropin-producing adenomas [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/attachment-pdf-191f1c62504#91ad881d-a1d8-400e-a28c-91d11f29ebc6)  ^91ad881d

> The pituitary gland lies outside the blood e brain barrier and consists of two lobes. The anterior lobe (adenohypophysis) produces and secretes hormones, regulated by hypothalamic- releasing hormones. The posterior lobe (neurohypophysis) stores and releases hormones secreted by the hypothalamus. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/attachment-pdf-191f1c62504#41cde885-6b8b-46d2-8eae-dabd60aaf06a)  ^41cde885

